Update and improve smart rollup tutorial (#118)
trilitech/tezos-developer-docs: src/pages/tutorials/smart-rollups/optimize.md

---
id: optimize
title: "Part 3: Optimizing the kernel"
lastUpdated: 25th October 2023
---

> To originate the kernel on Tezos, it must fit within the maximum size for a layer 1 operation.

Reviewer: Should we say what this size is? e.g. 
```suggestion
To originate the kernel on Tezos, it must fit within the maximum size for a layer 1 operation (< 32KB).
```

Author: "the maximum size for a layer 1 operation (32KB)"

> In these steps, you optimize the kernel:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In these steps, you reduce the size of the kernel:
```

Optimize still feels like it would give the wrong impression to a developer - this section is all about `Part 3: Reducing the kernel size`, and includes an explanation of why.

   To get the kernel running with an even smaller size, you can use the installer kernel, which includes only enough information to install your original kernel.
   To do this, your kernel is split up and stored in separate files called preimages.
   Then you run the installer kernel, it requests these files and reconstructs the original kernel.

1. Outside of the Docker container, run this command to install the installer kernel tool:

   ```bash
   cargo install tezos-smart-rollup-installer
   ```

1. Outside of the Docker container, run this command to create an installer kernel:

   ```bash
   smart-rollup-installer get-reveal-installer \
     --upgrade-to target/wasm32-unknown-unknown/release/hello_world_kernel.wasm \
     --output hello_world_kernel_installer.wasm --preimages-dir preimages/
   ```

   This command creates the following files:

   - `hello_world_kernel_installer.wasm`: The installer kernel
   - `preimages/`: A directory that contains the preimages that allow nodes to restore the original kernel code

>    When a node runs the installer kernel, it retrieves the preimages through the reveal data channel, a channel that smart rollups use to communicate outside of layer 1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   When a node runs the installer kernel, it retrieves the preimages through the reveal data channel, a channel that smart rollups use to request data from outside of layer 1.
```

It's not a communication channel - it can't send anything out through there.

   For more information about the reveal data channel, see [reveal data channel](https://tezos.gitlab.io/alpha/smart_rollups.html#reveal-data-channel).

1. Verify the size of the installer kernel by running this command:

   ```bash
   du -h hello_world_kernel_installer.wasm
   ```

   Now the kernel is small enough to originate on layer 1.

1. Inside of the Docker container, run the installer kernel in debug mode by running this command:

   ```bash
   octez-smart-rollup-wasm-debugger --kernel hello_world_kernel_installer.wasm \
     --preimage-dir preimages/ --inputs empty_input.json
   ```

>    Then you can use the `step inbox` command to simulate receiving the inbox from layer 1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Then you can use the `step inbox` command to simulate receiving the inbox from layer 1. You can see the hello world kernel messages - which shows the upgrade took place successfully.
```

Author: "You can see the hello world kernel messages in the log, which shows that the upgrade from the installer kernel to the full kernel was successful."

   Press Ctrl + C to end the debugging session.

> 1. Create a hexadecimal version of the installer kernel by running this command outside of the Docker container:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create a hex-encoded installer kernel by running this command outside of the Docker container:
```

   ```bash
   smart-rollup-installer get-reveal-installer \
     --upgrade-to target/wasm32-unknown-unknown/release/hello_world_kernel.wasm \
     --output hello_world_kernel_installer.hex --preimages-dir preimages/
   ```

>    In the next section, you originate this hex version of the installer kernel on layer 1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   In the next section, you originate this hex-encoded installer kernel on layer 1.
```

---
id: optimize
title: "Part 4: Optimizing the kernel"
lastUpdated: 11th October 2023
---

> The kernel must be efficient with space and processing power because there is a size limit for kernels.

Reviewer: The `processing power` thing is kind of unrelated to the size of the kernel. In general, there's also not a size limit for kernels (or rather, it's stupidly big) - it's only for origination where this matters.

I'm not sure `optimize` is the correct word here I guess, to a developer, it sounds like we're going to be making it faster, but actually we're just working around the limit of origination size.

Author: I can't come up with a better word than "optimize." "Compress?" "Reduce the size on disk of?"

Changed this line to:
> To originate the kernel on Tezos, it must fit within the maximum size for a layer 1 operation.

In these steps, you optimize the kernel:

1. Run this command to print the current size of the kernel:

   ```bash
   du -h target/wasm32-unknown-unknown/debug/hello_world_kernel.wasm
   ```

   You can run this command inside or outside of the Docker container.

>    The size of the compiled kernel and its dependencies may be 18MB or more, which is too large to deploy.

Reviewer: This is made much worse by us using a `debug_build`. It's actually `1.9MB` in a `release` build. To be honest, that should probably be the first thing to try?

Author: Added a release build with the commands `cargo build --release --target wasm32-unknown-unknown` and `du -h target/wasm32-unknown-unknown/release/hello_world_kernel.wasm`.

1. In a terminal window outside of the Docker container, run the `wasm-strip` command to reduce the size of the kernel:

   ```bash
   wasm-strip target/wasm32-unknown-unknown/debug/hello_world_kernel.wasm
   ```

   This command removes WebAssembly code that is not necessary to run rollups.
   You must run this command outside of the Docker container because it does not have the `wasm-strip` command.

1. Run the `du` command again to see the new size of the kernel:

   ```bash
   du -h target/wasm32-unknown-unknown/debug/hello_world_kernel.wasm
   ```

   The size of the kernel is smaller now.
   Note that the changes that you make to the kernel outside of the Docker container also appear in the container and vice versa because the folder is mounted with the Docker `--volume` argument.

   To optimize the kernel further, you can convert it to an _installer kernel_, which includes only enough information to start the kernel, like an installation program.

>    This installer kernel keeps the rest of its logic and data in separate files called _preimages_.

Reviewer: Not really - the preimages are _literally_ the original kernel. The install kernel effectively 'downloads them' (reveals the preimages) and writes them to `/kernel/boot.wasm` and then exits - the new kernel automatically starts.

Author: Updated to say:
> To optimize the kernel further, you can convert it to an _installer kernel_, which includes only enough information to start the kernel, like an installation program. To do this, you store the kernel logic and data in separate files called _preimages_. The installer kernel downloads them and uses them to restore the original kernel.

Reviewer: Maybe very slightly change to:

To get the kernel running, you can use the installer kernel, which includes only enough information to install your original kernel. To do this, your kernel is split up and stored in separate files called preimages. The installer kernel then requests them and reconstructs the original kernel, before upgrading to it.

Author: > To get the kernel running with an even smaller size, you can use the installer kernel, which includes only enough information to install your original kernel. To do this, your kernel is split up and stored in separate files called preimages. Then you run the installer kernel, it requests these files and reconstructs the original kernel.

1. Outside of the Docker container, run this command to install the installer kernel tool:

   ```bash
   cargo install tezos-smart-rollup-installer
   ```

1. Outside of the Docker container, run this command to convert the kernel to an installer kernel:

   ```bash
   smart-rollup-installer get-reveal-installer --upgrade-to target/wasm32-unknown-unknown/debug/hello_world_kernel.wasm --output hello_world_kernel_installer.hex --preimages-dir preimages/
   ```

   This command creates the following files:

> 

Reviewer: I wonder if, once we have the 'installer' prepared, we could convince the users that it works correctly, by running it in the debugger? It's super simple, and could highlight what I mean around 'pulling in the kernel'.  If interested, could maybe chat on slack?

Author: Added steps t o debug the installer kernel.

   - `hello_world_kernel_installer.hex`: The hexadecimal representation of the installer kernel
   - `preimages/`: A directory that contains the preimages that allow nodes to restore the installer kernel to the original kernel code

   When a node runs the installer kernel, it retrieves the preimages through the reveal data channel, a channel that smart rollups use to communicate outside of layer 1.
   For more information about the reveal data channel, see [reveal data channel](https://tezos.gitlab.io/alpha/smart_rollups.html#reveal-data-channel).

1. Verify the size of the installer kernel by running this command:

   ```bash
   du -h hello_world_kernel_installer.hex
   ```

Now the kernel is small enough to be originated on layer 1.

> In fact, when it is deployed, it will be even smaller than the result of this command because the command is checking the hexadecimal representation and the deployed kernel will be in binary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In fact, the installer kernel is half this size - as the installer kernel is hex-encoded; when we deploy it it will be converted to binary.
```

Author: > In fact, when it is deployed, it will be even smaller because it is currently hex-encoded and when you deploy it, it will be converted to binary.
